docs/guides/getting-started/core-concepts.mdx, before:

---
title: Core Concepts
description: 'Key terminology and concepts you need to know when using Latitude'
---

This glossary explains the fundamental concepts and terminology used throughout Latitude to help you better understand the platform.

## Prompt Engineering Basics

### Prompt

A text-based instruction sent to a language model to guide its response. In Latitude, prompts can include logic, such as variables, conditionals, loops, and other advanced features using PromptL syntax.

### PromptL

Latitude's [prompt templating language](https://promptl.ai) that enables dynamic prompt construction with variables, conditions, loops, and other programming concepts.

### Language Model (LLM)

The AI system that generates responses based on prompts. Examples include GPT-4, Claude, Gemini, among others.

### Provider

The company or service that offers access to language models, such as OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, or Azure.

## Latitude Platform Components

### Prompt Manager

The core interface for creating, editing, and managing prompts in Latitude. Includes the Prompt Editor, configuration settings, and version control.

### Playground

An interactive testing environment where you can run prompts with different inputs and configurations to see how they perform.

### AI Gateway

The deployment layer that exposes prompts as API endpoints, making them available for integration with applications. These are the addresses through which you will access your agent.

### Evaluations

Tools for assessing prompt performance using different methodologies:

- **LLM-as-Judge**: Using AI to evaluate outputs
- **Programmatic Rules**: Using code-based criteria
- **Manual Evaluations**: Human review of outputs

### Logs

Records of all interactions between prompts and language models, including inputs, outputs, metadata, and performance metrics.

### Datasets

Collections of input/output pairs used for testing, evaluations, and regression testing.

## Advanced Features

### Tools

Functions that prompts can call to access external capabilities, such as retrieving information, performing calculations, or taking actions.

### Agents

Advanced prompts that can make decisions, use tools, and solve complex problems through multiple interaction steps.

### JSON Mode

A configuration setting that enforces structured output formats through JSON schemas.

### Cache

A mechanism that stores previously generated responses to improve performance and reduce costs.

## Collaboration & Deployment

### Version Control

Features for tracking changes to prompts, comparing versions, and managing the prompt lifecycle from draft to production.

### Environments

Different contexts (e.g., development, staging, production) for deploying and testing prompts.

### Telemetry

Automatic capture of metrics and performance data from prompt interactions.

### Webhooks

Integration points that trigger actions in external systems when certain events occur in Latitude.

## Development Concepts

### SDK

Software Development Kits (available for TypeScript, Python, and other languages) are toolkits that allow for interaction with Latitude through your own computer programs.

### API

The Latitude HTTP API (Application Programming Interface) that provides access to platform features for custom integrations.

### Self-Hosting

Running Latitude on your own servers instead of using the managed cloud version.

## Building Blocks

### Prompt Template

The base structure of a prompt that includes placeholders for variables.

### Parameter

A value you provide in the prompt template that tells it what data to use or how to behave.

### Snippet

Reusable prompt fragment that can be shared across multiple prompts.

### System Message

Special instructions to the model that set context and behavior expectations.

### User Message

Content presented as coming from a user in a conversation with the model.

### Assistant Message

Content presented as previously generated by the model in a conversation.


## Next Steps

Now that you're familiar with the core concepts, you can:

- Follow the [No-code getting started guide](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-pm)
- Follow the [Developers getting started guide](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-dev)
- Learn about our [Prompt Manager](/guides/prompt-manager/overview) in more detail

Commit message:

Document multi-workspace per user support
Add workspace documentation across getting-started guides to explain
that Latitude supports multiple workspaces per user account.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01GPPAruFNXJkoFq9BQ8DS4J

docs/guides/getting-started/core-concepts.mdx, after:

---
title: Core Concepts
description: 'Key terminology and concepts you need to know when using Latitude'
---

This glossary explains the fundamental concepts and terminology used throughout Latitude to help you better understand the platform.

## Prompt Engineering Basics

### Prompt

A text-based instruction sent to a language model to guide its response. In Latitude, prompts can include logic, such as variables, conditionals, loops, and other advanced features using PromptL syntax.

### PromptL

Latitude's [prompt templating language](https://promptl.ai) that enables dynamic prompt construction with variables, conditions, loops, and other programming concepts.

### Language Model (LLM)

The AI system that generates responses based on prompts. Examples include GPT-4, Claude, Gemini, among others.

### Provider

The company or service that offers access to language models, such as OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, or Azure.

## Latitude Platform Components

### Workspace

A workspace is the top-level organizational unit in Latitude. It contains all your projects, prompts, evaluations, datasets, provider configurations, and API keys. Each workspace has its own team members, subscription plan, and usage limits.

A single user can belong to multiple workspaces. This is useful for separating concerns across different teams, clients, or products while using the same Latitude account. You can switch between workspaces at any time from the navigation bar without logging out.

### Prompt Manager

The core interface for creating, editing, and managing prompts in Latitude. Includes the Prompt Editor, configuration settings, and version control.

### Playground

An interactive testing environment where you can run prompts with different inputs and configurations to see how they perform.

### AI Gateway

The deployment layer that exposes prompts as API endpoints, making them available for integration with applications. These are the addresses through which you will access your agent.

### Evaluations

Tools for assessing prompt performance using different methodologies:

- **LLM-as-Judge**: Using AI to evaluate outputs
- **Programmatic Rules**: Using code-based criteria
- **Manual Evaluations**: Human review of outputs

### Logs

Records of all interactions between prompts and language models, including inputs, outputs, metadata, and performance metrics.

### Datasets

Collections of input/output pairs used for testing, evaluations, and regression testing.

## Advanced Features

### Tools

Functions that prompts can call to access external capabilities, such as retrieving information, performing calculations, or taking actions.

### Agents

Advanced prompts that can make decisions, use tools, and solve complex problems through multiple interaction steps.

### JSON Mode

A configuration setting that enforces structured output formats through JSON schemas.

### Cache

A mechanism that stores previously generated responses to improve performance and reduce costs.

## Collaboration & Deployment

### Version Control

Features for tracking changes to prompts, comparing versions, and managing the prompt lifecycle from draft to production.

### Environments

Different contexts (e.g., development, staging, production) for deploying and testing prompts.

### Telemetry

Automatic capture of metrics and performance data from prompt interactions.

### Webhooks

Integration points that trigger actions in external systems when certain events occur in Latitude.

## Development Concepts

### SDK

Software Development Kits (available for TypeScript, Python, and other languages) are toolkits that allow for interaction with Latitude through your own computer programs.

### API

The Latitude HTTP API (Application Programming Interface) that provides access to platform features for custom integrations.

### Self-Hosting

Running Latitude on your own servers instead of using the managed cloud version.

## Building Blocks

### Prompt Template

The base structure of a prompt that includes placeholders for variables.

### Parameter

A value you provide in the prompt template that tells it what data to use or how to behave.

### Snippet

Reusable prompt fragment that can be shared across multiple prompts.

### System Message

Special instructions to the model that set context and behavior expectations.

### User Message

Content presented as coming from a user in a conversation with the model.

### Assistant Message

Content presented as previously generated by the model in a conversation.


## Next Steps

Now that you're familiar with the core concepts, you can:

- Follow the [No-code getting started guide](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-pm)
- Follow the [Developers getting started guide](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-dev)
- Learn about our [Prompt Manager](/guides/prompt-manager/overview) in more detail
