docs/guides/getting-started/setup.mdx, before:

---
title: Setup and Prerequisites
description: 'Everything you need to get started with Latitude'
---

Before you can start using Latitude, there are a few things you need to set up. This guide will walk you through the process step by step.

## Sign Up for Latitude

You have two options for using Latitude:

### Option 1: Latitude Cloud (Managed Service)

1. Visit [latitude.so](https://latitude.so) and click "Sign Up"
2. Create an account using:
   - Email and password
   - Google SSO
   - GitHub SSO
3. Verify your email address
4. Log in to your new Latitude account

### Option 2: Self-Hosted Instance

If you prefer to host Latitude on your own infrastructure:

1. Follow our [self-hosted development](/guides/self-hosted/development) or [production](/guides/self-hosted/production) guides
2. Set up your instance with the required dependencies
3. Create your admin account during the setup process

## Connect to AI Providers

Latitude works with various AI providers. You'll need API access to at least one provider:

### Supported Providers

- **OpenAI**: [Get API keys](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys)
- **Anthropic**: [Get API keys](https://console.anthropic.com/account/keys)
- **Google AI**: [Set up credentials](https://ai.google.dev/tutorials/setup)
- **Azure OpenAI**: [Set up Azure OpenAI Service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/create-resource)
- **Other providers**: See our [Providers guide](/guides/getting-started/providers) for a complete list

### Adding a Provider in Latitude

1. In your Latitude account, go to "Settings" > "Providers"
2. Click "Add Provider"
3. Select your provider
4. Enter your API key and other required configuration
5. Test the connection
6. Click "Save"

## Environment Setup for Developers

If you're a developer planning to use Latitude SDKs:

### For JavaScript/TypeScript Development

1. Ensure you have Node.js (16 or higher) installed
2. Have a package manager (npm, yarn, or pnpm) available
3. Install the Latitude SDK:
   ```bash
   npm install @latitude-data/sdk
   ```

### For Python Development

1. Ensure you have Python (3.9 or higher) installed
2. Set up a virtual environment (recommended):
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
3. Have a package manager (pip, poetry, or uv) available
4. Install the Latitude SDK:
   ```bash
   pip install latitude-sdk
   ```

## Create Your First Project

Once you have signed up and connected a provider:

1. From the Latitude dashboard, click "New Project"
2. Give your project a name and description
3. Select a default AI provider (can be changed later)
4. Click "Create Project"

Your new project will be set up with default settings appropriate for your selected provider.

## Invite Your Team (Optional)

Latitude is designed for team collaboration. To invite team members:

1. Go to "Settings" > "Team Members"
2. Click "Invite Member"
3. Enter their email address and select their role:
   - **Admin**: Full access to all features and settings
   - **Member**: Can create and edit prompts, run evaluations, but cannot change settings
   - **Viewer**: Can view prompts and logs but cannot make changes
4. Click "Send Invite"

Invited users will receive an email with instructions to join your Latitude workspace.

## Next Steps

Now that you're set up, choose your path to get started:

- [No-code getting started](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-pm)
- [Developers getting started](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-dev)
- [Core Concepts](/guides/getting-started/core-concepts) (Glossary)

Commit message:

Document multi-workspace per user support
Add workspace documentation across getting-started guides to explain
that Latitude supports multiple workspaces per user account.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01GPPAruFNXJkoFq9BQ8DS4J

docs/guides/getting-started/setup.mdx, after:

---
title: Setup and Prerequisites
description: 'Everything you need to get started with Latitude'
---

Before you can start using Latitude, there are a few things you need to set up. This guide will walk you through the process step by step.

## Sign Up for Latitude

You have two options for using Latitude:

### Option 1: Latitude Cloud (Managed Service)

1. Visit [latitude.so](https://latitude.so) and click "Sign Up"
2. Create an account using:
   - Email and password
   - Google SSO
   - GitHub SSO
3. Verify your email address
4. Log in to your new Latitude account

### Option 2: Self-Hosted Instance

If you prefer to host Latitude on your own infrastructure:

1. Follow our [self-hosted development](/guides/self-hosted/development) or [production](/guides/self-hosted/production) guides
2. Set up your instance with the required dependencies
3. Create your admin account during the setup process

## Connect to AI Providers

Latitude works with various AI providers. You'll need API access to at least one provider:

### Supported Providers

- **OpenAI**: [Get API keys](https://platform.openai.com/account/api-keys)
- **Anthropic**: [Get API keys](https://console.anthropic.com/account/keys)
- **Google AI**: [Set up credentials](https://ai.google.dev/tutorials/setup)
- **Azure OpenAI**: [Set up Azure OpenAI Service](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/openai/how-to/create-resource)
- **Other providers**: See our [Providers guide](/guides/getting-started/providers) for a complete list

### Adding a Provider in Latitude

1. In your Latitude account, go to "Settings" > "Providers"
2. Click "Add Provider"
3. Select your provider
4. Enter your API key and other required configuration
5. Test the connection
6. Click "Save"

## Environment Setup for Developers

If you're a developer planning to use Latitude SDKs:

### For JavaScript/TypeScript Development

1. Ensure you have Node.js (16 or higher) installed
2. Have a package manager (npm, yarn, or pnpm) available
3. Install the Latitude SDK:
   ```bash
   npm install @latitude-data/sdk
   ```

### For Python Development

1. Ensure you have Python (3.9 or higher) installed
2. Set up a virtual environment (recommended):
   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
   ```
3. Have a package manager (pip, poetry, or uv) available
4. Install the Latitude SDK:
   ```bash
   pip install latitude-sdk
   ```

## Create Your First Project

Once you have signed up and connected a provider:

1. From the Latitude dashboard, click "New Project"
2. Give your project a name and description
3. Select a default AI provider (can be changed later)
4. Click "Create Project"

Your new project will be set up with default settings appropriate for your selected provider.

## Invite Your Team (Optional)

Latitude is designed for team collaboration. To invite team members:

1. Go to "Settings" > "Team Members"
2. Click "Invite Member"
3. Enter their email address and select their role:
   - **Admin**: Full access to all features and settings
   - **Member**: Can create and edit prompts, run evaluations, but cannot change settings
   - **Viewer**: Can view prompts and logs but cannot make changes
4. Click "Send Invite"

Invited users will receive an email with instructions to join your Latitude workspace. If they already have a Latitude account, the new workspace will be added to their account and they can [switch between workspaces](/guides/getting-started/invite-your-team#working-across-multiple-workspaces) from the navigation bar.

## Multiple Workspaces (Optional)

Latitude supports multiple workspaces per user. This lets you keep separate environments for different teams, clients, or products while using a single account. Each workspace has its own projects, provider configurations, API keys, team members, and subscription plan.

To create an additional workspace, use the workspace switcher in the navigation bar and select "Create Workspace". You can switch between your workspaces at any time without logging out.

## Next Steps

Now that you're set up, choose your path to get started:

- [No-code getting started](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-pm)
- [Developers getting started](/guides/getting-started/quick-start-dev)
- [Core Concepts](/guides/getting-started/core-concepts) (Glossary)
