docs/guides/evaluations/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: Overview
description: Understand the different ways to evaluate prompt performance in Latitude.
---

Evaluations are crucial for understanding and improving the quality of your AI prompt responses. Latitude provides a comprehensive evaluation framework to assess performance against various criteria.

## Why Evaluate Prompts?

- **Measure Quality**: Objectively assess if prompts meet desired standards (accuracy, relevance, tone, safety, etc.).
- **Identify Weaknesses**: Pinpoint scenarios where prompts underperform.
- **Compare Versions**: Quantify the impact of prompt changes (A/B testing).
- **Drive Improvement**: Gather data to refine prompts using [Prompt Suggestions](/guides/evaluations/prompt-suggestions).
- **Ensure Reliability**: Build confidence in production-deployed prompts.

## Evaluation Types in Latitude

Latitude supports three main approaches to evaluation, each suited for different needs:

1.  [**LLM-as-Judge**](/guides/evaluations/llm-as-judges):
    - **How it works**: Uses another language model (the "judge") to score or critique the output of your target prompt based on specific criteria (e.g., helpfulness, clarity, adherence to instructions).
    - **Best for**: Subjective criteria, complex assessments, evaluating nuanced qualities like creativity or tone.
    - **Requires**: Defining evaluation criteria (often via templates or custom instructions for the judge LLM).

2.  [**Programmatic Rules**](/guides/evaluations/programmatic_rules):
    - **How it works**: Applies code-based rules and metrics to check outputs against objective criteria.
    - **Best for**: Objective checks, ground truth comparisons (using datasets), format validation (JSON, regex), safety checks (keyword detection), length constraints.
    - **Requires**: Defining specific rules (e.g., exact match, contains keyword, JSON schema validation) and potentially providing a [Dataset](/guides/datasets/overview) with expected outputs.

3.  [**Human-in-the-Loop (Manual Evaluations)**](/guides/evaluations/humans-in-the-loop):
    - **How it works**: Team members manually review prompt outputs (logs) and assign scores or labels based on their judgment.
    - **Best for**: Capturing nuanced human preferences, evaluating criteria difficult for LLMs to judge, initial quality assessment, creating golden datasets for other evaluation types.
    - **Requires**: Setting up manual review workflows and criteria for reviewers.

## How Evaluations Connect to Prompts

- **Per-Prompt Basis**: Evaluations are configured individually for each prompt within a project.
- **Target Logs**: Evaluations run on the [Logs](/guides/logs/overview) generated by their associated prompt.
- **Triggering**: Evaluations can be run manually on batches of logs/datasets or automatically on incoming logs (live mode). See [Running Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/running-evaluations).
- **Results**: Evaluation results (scores, labels, feedback) are stored alongside the corresponding logs, providing a rich dataset for analysis and improvement.

## Actual Outputs

The actual output is the generated output from the model conversation. This is the output to perform evaluations against.

### Selecting the Actual Output to evaluate against

By default the actual output is the last assistant message in the conversation, parsed as a simple string. However, some use cases requires more complex parsing, like evaluating tool calling or middle CoT.

1. Go to the evaluation's settings by clicking on the right-side button in the evaluation's dashboard:
   ![Evaluation settings button](/assets/evaluation-settings-button.png)
2. Click on **Advanced configuration**.
3. Configure:
   - Message selection: The last message or all messages in the conversation.
   - Content filter: Optionally filter the messages by content type (e.g., text, images, tool calls...).
   - Parsing format: The format to parse the actual output into (e.g., string, JSON, YAML...).
   - Field accessor: The optional field to access in the actual output (e.g., `answer`, `arguments.recommendations[2]`, `[-1].tool_name`, ...).
     ![Evaluation actual output configuration](/assets/evaluation-settings-outputs.png)
4. Test the configuration by clicking on the "Test" button:
   ![Evaluation actual output test](/assets/evaluation-settings-outputs-test.png)

## Expected Outputs

The expected output, also known as label, refers to the correct or ideal response that the language model should generate for a given prompt. You can create [Datasets](/guides/datasets/overview) with [Expected Output Columns](/guides/datasets/overview#marking-an-expected-output-column-as-a-label) to evaluate prompts with ground truth.
![Evaluation expected output](/assets/evaluation-expected-output.png)

## Negative Evaluations

Sometimes, you want to measure undesirable traits (e.g., toxicity, hallucination presence), where a _lower_ score is better. Latitude allows you to mark evaluations as "negative".

1. Go to the evaluation's settings by clicking on the right-side button in the evaluation's dashboard:
   ![Evaluation settings button](/assets/evaluation-settings-button.png)
2. Click on **Advanced configuration**.
3. Select "optimize for a lower score" to indicate high scores are undesirable:
   ![Evaluation negative setting](/assets/evaluation-settings-negative.png)

> The [Prompt Suggestions](/guides/evaluations/prompt-suggestions) feature will use this setting to optimize correctly.

## Next Steps

Dive deeper into each evaluation type:

- [LLM-as-Judge Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/llm-as-judges)
- [Programmatic Rule Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/programmatic_rules)
- [HITL (Humans in the Loop) Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/humans-in-the-loop)

Commit message:

Composite Evaluations (#1874)
* Composite evaluations

* Add docs

* Update docs

docs/guides/evaluations/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: Overview
description: Understand the different ways to evaluate prompt performance in Latitude.
---

Evaluations are crucial for understanding and improving the quality of your AI prompt responses. Latitude provides a comprehensive evaluation framework to assess performance against various criteria.

## Why Evaluate Prompts?

- **Measure Quality**: Objectively assess if prompts meet desired standards (accuracy, relevance, tone, safety, etc.).
- **Identify Weaknesses**: Pinpoint scenarios where prompts underperform.
- **Compare Versions**: Quantify the impact of prompt changes (A/B testing).
- **Drive Improvement**: Gather data to refine prompts using [Prompt Suggestions](/guides/evaluations/prompt-suggestions).
- **Ensure Reliability**: Build confidence in production-deployed prompts.

## Evaluation Types

Latitude supports three main approaches to evaluation, each suited for different needs:

1.  [**LLM-as-Judge**](/guides/evaluations/llm-as-judges):
    - **How it works**: Uses another language model (the "judge") to score or critique the output of your target prompt based on specific criteria (e.g., helpfulness, clarity, adherence to instructions).
    - **Best for**: Subjective criteria, complex assessments, evaluating nuanced qualities like creativity or tone.
    - **Requires**: Defining evaluation criteria (often via templates or custom instructions for the judge LLM).

2.  [**Programmatic Rule**](/guides/evaluations/programmatic-rules):
    - **How it works**: Applies code-based rules and metrics to check outputs against objective criteria.
    - **Best for**: Objective checks, ground truth comparisons (using datasets), format validation (JSON, regex), safety checks (keyword detection), length constraints.
    - **Requires**: Defining specific rules (e.g., exact match, contains keyword, JSON schema validation) and potentially providing a [Dataset](/guides/datasets/overview) with expected outputs.

3.  [**Human-in-the-Loop**](/guides/evaluations/humans-in-the-loop):
    - **How it works**: Team members manually review prompt outputs (logs) and assign scores or labels based on their judgment.
    - **Best for**: Capturing nuanced human preferences, evaluating criteria difficult for LLMs to judge, initial quality assessment, creating golden datasets for other evaluation types.
    - **Requires**: Setting up manual review workflows and criteria for reviewers.

## Combining Evaluations

Sometimes you want to summarize the results of multiple evaluations into a single score, defining, for example, an overall performance report of your prompt.
To do this, you can use [Composite Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/composite-scores), also named _Composite Scores_.

## How Evaluations Connect to Prompts

- **Per-Prompt Basis**: Evaluations are configured individually for each prompt within a project.
- **Target Logs**: Evaluations run on the [Logs](/guides/logs/overview) generated by their associated prompt.
- **Triggering**: Evaluations can be run manually on batches of logs/datasets or automatically on incoming logs (live mode). See [Running Evaluations](/guides/evaluations/running-evaluations).
- **Results**: Evaluation results (scores, labels, feedback) are stored alongside the corresponding logs, providing a rich dataset for analysis and improvement.

## Actual Outputs

The actual output is the generated output from the model conversation. This is the output to perform evaluations against.

### Selecting the Actual Output to evaluate against

By default the actual output is the last assistant message in the conversation, parsed as a simple string. However, some use cases requires more complex parsing, like evaluating tool calling or middle CoT.

1. Go to the evaluation's settings by clicking on the right-side button in the evaluation's dashboard:
   ![Evaluation settings button](/assets/evaluation-settings-button.png)
2. Click on **Advanced configuration**.
3. Configure:
   - Message selection: The last message or all messages in the conversation.
   - Content filter: Optionally filter the messages by content type (e.g., text, images, tool calls...).
   - Parsing format: The format to parse the actual output into (e.g., string, JSON, YAML...).
   - Field accessor: The optional field to access in the actual output (e.g., `answer`, `arguments.recommendations[2]`, `[-1].tool_name`, ...).
     ![Evaluation actual output configuration](/assets/evaluation-settings-outputs.png)
4. Test the configuration by clicking on the "Test" button:
   ![Evaluation actual output test](/assets/evaluation-settings-outputs-test.png)

## Expected Outputs

The expected output, also known as label, refers to the correct or ideal response that the language model should generate for a given prompt. You can create [Datasets](/guides/datasets/overview) with [Expected Output Columns](/guides/datasets/overview#marking-an-expected-output-column-as-a-label) to evaluate prompts with ground truth.
![Evaluation expected output](/assets/evaluation-expected-output.png)

## Negative Evaluations

Sometimes, you want to measure undesirable traits (e.g., toxicity, hallucination presence), where a _lower_ score is better. Latitude allows you to mark evaluations as "negative".

1. Go to the evaluation's settings by clicking on the right-side button in the evaluation's dashboard:
   ![Evaluation settings button](/assets/evaluation-settings-button.png)
2. Click on **Advanced configuration**.
3. Select "optimize for a lower score" to indicate high scores are undesirable:
   ![Evaluation negative setting](/assets/evaluation-settings-negative.png)

> The [Prompt Suggestions](/guides/evaluations/prompt-suggestions) feature will use this setting to optimize correctly.

## Next Steps

Dive deeper into each evaluation type:

- [LLM-as-Judges](/guides/evaluations/llm-as-judges)
- [Programmatic Rules](/guides/evaluations/programmatic-rules)
- [HITL (Humans in the Loop)](/guides/evaluations/humans-in-the-loop)
- [Composite Scores](/guides/evaluations/composite-scores)
